---
title:  "What is a Number?"
description: "I challenge you to give me a definition of a number. It's difficult, right? How can a seemingly intuitive notion be so difficult put into words?"
date:   "2019-06-24"
---
What is a number?   This is not just a rhetorical question to tease the brain.  I would like to ask the reader to take a second to try to define the concept.  Were you able to define it without using the word "number?"  What about the term "count?"  For those who are new to this concept, why is it seemingly difficult to define something that we are so intimately familiar with in our day to day life?  First, numbers are intuitive as we have addressed.  Second, though intuitive, the questions regarding the ontological nature of a number are fundamentally difficult. You should not be discouraged from the lack of rigour in composing a definition.  Brilliant minds from antiquity to the renaissance have tried to tackle this question; the likes of Aristotle, Plato, Kant and Hobbes.  The epistemological roots of the concept *Number* is deep and can be addressed in various philosophical ways but we won't worry to much about the different schools of thought. For the curious reader interested in the zeitgeist of mathematical philosophy during the early 20$$^{th}$$ century, further reading into Platonic formalism, Kantian intuitionism and Frege's logicism should be sufficient in providing more context.  In the information to come, the focus will be upon Gottlob Frege's logicism.

In this section and sections to come we are covering the writings of Russell and a few logicians of the time. The level of precision that these writers would strive to achieve in their compositions is something to admire.  In result, the difficulty in which to comprehend these pieces of logic can challenge the mental faculties of our sense and reference to the abstract.  For this reason our goal is be as clear as possible and to make use of literary devices so that we can best convey a mapping to the conceptual understanding.  Ultimately, to provide a source of intuition but enough talk, let jump right into this investigation. I will start with the conclusion and see if we can work our way backwards to comprehend the formal intricacies.

** What is a number? **

$\text{Definition:  A number is anything which is the number of some class}$

In the above definition, a semantic distinction needs to be made to our lexicon so far as to identify what exactly is being defined.  When we think of numbers, in the intuitive sense, the most rudimentary form is the natural numbers $$\mathbb{N} = \{0,1,2,3,...\}$$   Statements like, "I have 2 dollars" or, "There are a dozen eggs in the carton," are in reference to the objects of the set of natural numbers. In the former, the collection of dollars has the characteristic *2*, and in the latter the group of eggs has the characteristic \text{12}. An important distinction was made in the prior example.  The collection of objects, whether that is money, eggs or people, has the characteristic of the number $$x \text{ such that } x\in\mathbb{N}$$. The group, class, collection - which are all interchangeable for our purposes and which we commonly perceive empirically -  \textbf{is not the same as a number}.   These collections characterized by the natural numbers are called pluralities. In the formal sense of mathematics, this notion of plurality, like couple, trio, quartet, or any group that can be identified with a number, **again**, is not what is being defined when asked, "what is a number?"  An example will help solidify this grammar.  The *number 12* as in our example above is not identical to a dozen.  The number 12 is what characterizes a group of 12 objects - that is our dozen of eggs.  In another example, "...the number 3 is not identical with the trio consisting of the people Brown, Jones and Robinson. The number 3 is something which all trios have in common and which distinguishes them from other groups"(Russell, 1919, p.11).

Finally, to drive home this idea, computer scientist can find an analogous comparison between a number and object-oriented programming.  A trio is an instance of the class *number 3*.  All trios are instantiated with the characteristics of the *number 3*. To go one level deeper into the abstraction. *Number* is a class and objects of the natural numbers like *number 1*, *number 2*, *number 3 * and so on, are an instantiation of the class *Number*.  In the above description, three objects have been identified; *Number*, a specific number and a group that has the characteristic of a specific number. Transitivity does not apply. A trio is not an instantiation of the object *Number*. For the sake of repetition to emphasize the point, it is also the case a group like a trio is not the same as the *number 3*, but instead has the quality of the *number 3*. To provide intuition, think of *Number* as a characteristic or quality of a particular number "...as *man* is characteristic of men"(Russell, 1919, p.11).  

The next logical step is to define a class since we outlined that "...a number is something that characterises certain collections, namely, those [classes] that have that number"(Russell, 1919, p.12).  For clarity, class was used above interchangeably with group, collection and plurality.  A class can be defined in two ways.  A definition by extension or a definition by intention.  A definition by extension is essentially enumeration of the collective objects in the class. The natural numbers is the class of the *number 1*, the *number 2*, the *number 3* and so on.  Take a second to think about what was said. What problem arises if we define a class by enumeration?

The problem is infinity.  Enumeration may work with the example of the trio given above but its impossible to define the set of natural numbers by enumeration.  It is impossible to count the class of all men on this planet but it is possible to define a class by its characteristics.  In this case, men can be defined by the genus and species, homo sapiens, or - in the spirit of philosophy and antiquity - Plato's "featherless biped"(Russell, 1919, p.14).  The keen observer would see that a class can be defined by many characteristics but the characteristic mapping is unique to one class.  To highlight this point about enumeration, in Aristotelian logic - a pre-cursor to the formal system of first-order predicate logic,  which will be addressed later - we can state the propositions:

- 1 is a *Number*
- 2 is a *Number*
- 3 is a *Number*
- etc...

If we replace 1, 2, and 3 with the variable $$x$$, we get $$x$$ is a *Number*.  All $$x$$ that satisfy the predicate, "is a *Number*?" - that is have the essence of *Number*'ness - are in the set of all Numbers. In this context we are talking about the class of natural numbers. This is the definition by intention.  A definition by intention is a definition of the "objective nature" of an object. The cardinality of objects in the universe are arguably infinite and so it is necessary the the definition of *Number* account for the infinite case.

The next example should help lead us to our conclusion. The *number 3* will be used again for this example.  Our definition by intention states that the *number 3*&nbsp; is the class of all objects that have the characteristic of the *number 3*.  In other words the *number 3* &nbsp;is the class of all groups of three in this infinite universe.  But how do we identify the 3'ness of a group.  Again, the intuitive answer would be to count if there are 3 things in our group but by proceeding in this way, a logical error is being made. Take a second to think about the problem. The problem is the error of presupposition. Counting assumes the existence of numbers so how could we count if we do not yet have a construction of the concept *Number*.  Our answer then is to identify a bijection - a one-to-one relation.  The objective being to identify all objects that are similar to one another by comparing them side by side.  Put simply, "if there were no polygamy and polyandry in the world," it would then follow that there would be an equal amount of husbands to wives(Russell, 1919, p.15). No counting. Another example, is if a group of students arrived to their scheduled class and the professor could see that there were empty seats, then the conclusion would be that there were more seats than students.  Again, without the necessity of counting.  The point emphasizes that 3'ness is an objective characteristic we can intuit.  Groups that are similar in characteristic can be determined to have the same number without counting. Formally,

$\text{Definition: The number of a class is the class of all those classes that are similar to it.}$

In result, we come full circle to our definition of a number:

$\text{Definition: A number is anything which is the number of some class.}$
